=head1 NAME

vhost-analyzer

=head1 SYNOPSIS

vhost-analyzer [OPTIONS] access.log

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<vhost-analyzer> is a useful tool to analyze your access.log
containing the logs of many different virtual hosts. It shows for each
virtual host found in the access.log file the number of requests, the
total data transferred (from the webserver to the clients), as well as
the peak number of requests answered in one minute.

By default, B<vhost-analyzer> parses the first eight fields of each
log entry. The first fields is the virtual host name, and the other
fields are equal to the Common Log Format fields. For the Apache
webserver, this means that the log format needs to start as follows:

    LogFormat "%V %h %l %u %t \"%r\" %s %b" vcombined

Since extra fields are not parsed, any number and combination of other
fields can be added.

B<vhost-analyzer> can also be used to parse logs which start with the
Common Log Format fields but which don't contain the virtual host
name. Using the C<--add-host> option, all records can be considered
for one specific virtual host.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-h|--help>

Show the help message.

=item B<-s|--select EXPRESSION>

This options allows to specify which lines should be used in the
analysis. Lines not matching the given expression are not included in
the analysis.

Expressions are an and/or combination of simple string matching
expressions of the form C<KEY OP STRING>, whereas C<KEY> can be one of
the following keys: C<vhost>, C<remote_host>, C<logname>,
C<remote_user>, C<time>, C<request>, C<status>, C<method>, C<path>,
C<query>. C<OP> is a comparison operation: C<=> (equal), C<!=> (not
equal), C<=~> (perl regex match), C<!~> (inverse perl regex match).

Examples:

=over

=item C<vhost="mydomain.com">

Analyzes only records for the virtual host C<mydomain.com>.

=item C<vhost="mydomain.com" and path=~"\.(css|js|png|gif|jpg)$">

Analyzes accesses to static files on for C<mydomain.com>.

=back

=item B<-o|--sort-by FIELD>

Sort the resulting table by the specified field. Available fields for
sorting:

=over

=item vhost (default): Sort by virtual host name

=item requests: Sort by number of requests

=item traffic: Sort by traffic

=item peak: Sort by peak requests (highest number of requests in one minute)

=back

=item B<-t|--total>

Add a Total row to the output table.

=item B<-T|--truncate-vhosts NUMBER>

Truncate virtualhost names to contain only up to NUMBER dots
(including implicit trailing dot). For example, 2 means that
C<*.domain.com> gets truncated to C<domain.com>.

=item B<-S|--statistics>

Show some useful statistics.

=item B<-a|--add-vhost VHOST>

Consider all lines to be from the specified VHOST. Use this if you
want to work on the log of a single virtual host which doesn't have
the virtual host field.

=back

=head1 REQUIREMENTS

The tool requires the Regexp::Grammars package. Install it using the
following command on Debian based systems: C<apt-get install
libregexp-grammars-perl>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2016 Oliver Hitz

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307,
USA.

